blogpost: Optimizing the code intelligence commit graph (#2431)
sourcegraph/about: blogposts/2021/optimizing-a-code-intelligence-commit-graph.md

Regardless of the indexing method, it is always possible for a user to find themselves browsing a commit for which Sourcegraph has not received an index. This can happen due to a slow job in a continuous integration server, a backed-up indexing processing queue, or the commit may simply be skipped in the case of a periodic refresh.

This is a glaring hole in the feature. The majority of users are exploring code on the tip of a branch, which is the _least_ likely commit to have an index immediately after it's been pushed to the code host.

In order to plug this hole, we determine the set of nearby commits for which Sourcegraph has received an index, query these indexes on behalf of the requested commit, then adjust the resulting locations (file paths and ranges within a document) using the git diff between the commits as a guide. This enables Sourcegraph to respond with precise results to requests on commits missing an index.

## Tracking cross-commit index visibility

> The [first step](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5691) in this process is to track how commits of a repository relate to one another. Unfortunately, the service providing the code intelligence features was separated (by design) from the rest of the product. We had only recently [gained access](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5740) to the Sourcegraph Postgres database used by the rest of the application, and no other team was tracking commit information. The source of truth for that data was gitserver, which required both an RPC call and a subprocess to access.

Author: `gitserver` is the name of a specific pod in our deployment and I've never seen it cased like this. We have other pods like `precise-code-intel-worker`, which wouldn't be able to be cased symmetrically.

> The [first step](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5691) in this process is to track how commits of a repository relate to one another. Unfortunately, the service providing the code intelligence features was separated (by design) from the rest of the product. We had only recently [gained access](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5740) to the Sourcegraph Postgres database used by the rest of the application, and no other team was tracking commit information. The source of truth for that data was gitserver, which required both an RPC call and a subprocess to access.

Reviewer: @efritz If you don't have a preference, let's standardise on PostreSQL

> The [first step](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5691) in this process is to track how commits of a repository relate to one another. Unfortunately, the service providing the code intelligence features was separated (by design) from the rest of the product. We had only recently [gained access](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5740) to the Sourcegraph Postgres database used by the rest of the application, and no other team was tracking commit information. The source of truth for that data was gitserver, which required both an RPC call and a subprocess to access.

Author: PostgreSQL is fine with me, it's `GitServer` that seems odd as we've never cased it that way in any of our docs.

> The [first step](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5691) in this process is to track how commits of a repository relate to one another. Unfortunately, the service providing the code intelligence features was separated (by design) from the rest of the product. We had only recently [gained access](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5740) to the Sourcegraph Postgres database used by the rest of the application, and no other team was tracking commit information. The source of truth for that data was gitserver, which required both an RPC call and a subprocess to access.

Reviewer: @efritz Ah, sorry I can't seem to find your other comment about gitserver now – let's keep it consistent with how you case it.

> The [first step](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5691) in this process is to track how commits of a repository relate to one another. Unfortunately, the service providing the code intelligence features was separated (by design) from the rest of the product. We had only recently [gained access](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5740) to the Sourcegraph Postgres database used by the rest of the application, and no other team was tracking commit information. The source of truth for that data was gitserver, which required both an RPC call and a subprocess to access.

Author: ```suggestion
The first step in this process is to [track how commits of a repository relate to one another](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5691). Unfortunately, the service providing the code intelligence features was separated (by design) from the rest of the product. We had only recently [gained access to the Sourcegraph PostgreSQL database](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5740) used by the rest of the application, and no other team was tracking commit information. The source of truth for that data was gitserver, which required both an RPC call and a subprocess to access.
```

The `commits` table stores data similar to a flattened version of the output from `git log --all --pretty='%H %P'` (a commit followed by a list of its parents), for each repository. Example values for this table are shown below to aid our running example. This table would generally store the full 40-character revhash - we are abbreviating them for brevity here.

| id  | repository                    | commit              | parent_commit       |
| --- | ----------------------------- | ------------------- | ------------------- |
| 1   | github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>a36064</code> | <code>f4fb06</code> |
| 2   | github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>f4fb06</code> | <code>4c8d9d</code> |
| 3   | github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>313082</code> | <code>4c8d9d</code> |
| 3   | github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>6a06fc</code> | <code>313082</code> |
| 4   | github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>4c8d9d</code> | <code>d67b8d</code> |
| 5   | github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>d67b8d</code> | <code>323e23</code> |
| 6   | github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>323e23</code> |                     |

> This table is synchronized with the source of truth in gitserver whenever we receive a request or an index for a commit that we didn't know about previously. A row present in the `lsif_data_markers` table denotes that an index was uploaded for a particular commit. Example values for this table are also shown below.

Author: `gitserver` is the name of a specific pod in our deployment and I've never seen it cased like this. We have other pods like `precise-code-intel-worker`, which wouldn't be able to be cased symmetrically.

Thoughts on casing for this in general?

> This table is synchronized with the source of truth in gitserver whenever we receive a request or an index for a commit that we didn't know about previously. A row present in the `lsif_data_markers` table denotes that an index was uploaded for a particular commit. Example values for this table are also shown below.

Author: https://github.com/sourcegraph/about/pull/2431#discussion_r635081072

| 2         | <code>6a06fc</code> | <code>313082</code> | false         | 1        | D         |
| 3         | <code>d67b8d</code> | <code>323e23</code> | true          | 2        | A         |

Of particular note is that we don't visit _sibling_ commits: once we reach a commit by travelling in the ancestor direction, we can't suddenly flip direction. Maintaining the direction heading during traversal ensures that the algorithm will eventually terminate.

## Performance improvements

Unfortunately, our first stab at an implementation had a number of rather disappointing performance characteristics, as first stabs typically do. The query above is basically a SQL translation of an imperative graph-walking algorithm. Thinking of the query in these terms makes it easier to see that the runtime cost of the query will increase proportional to the distance travelled through the graph.

The following query plan shows an execution trace that visited around 10 commits (the resulting commit was 5 commits away, and we search in both directions). This query takes about 40ms, which is already a high cost for a query that runs every time a user hovers over an identifier.

> ![fast query plan](https://sourcegraphstatic.com/blog/commit-graph-optimizations/fast.png)

Author: Maybe I'm misunderstanding these suggestions, but the proceeding paragraph does describe the image. Can you give an example of what you'd expect to see for this image?

> ![fast query plan](https://sourcegraphstatic.com/blog/commit-graph-optimizations/fast.png)

Reviewer: Sorry, hit resolve accidentally! @efritz I like to include captions for people who skim the post. They won't necessarily read the preceding paragraph if they're scanning, but a short caption describing what the image is may draw them in.

> ![fast query plan](https://sourcegraphstatic.com/blog/commit-graph-optimizations/fast.png)

Author: Ah sure. I can add captions here - is there a standard way we do that in markdown/blog posts? Do you just want more detail than `[fast query plan]`?

> ![fast query plan](https://sourcegraphstatic.com/blog/commit-graph-optimizations/fast.png)

Author: (Explained in DM).

<tr><td>2</td><td><code>5a24e4</code></td><td><code>3d2f27</code></td><td>false</td><td>1</td><td>A</td></tr>
<tr><td>2</td><td><code>6307e6</code></td><td><code>4a848f</code></td><td>false</td><td>1</td><td>A</td></tr>
<tr class="workingtable-highlight"><td>3</td><td><code>3d2f27</code></td><td><code>09210f</code></td><td>false</td><td>2</td><td>A</td></tr>
<tr class="workingtable-highlight"><td>3</td><td><code>3d2f27</code></td><td><code>2190d3</code></td><td>false</td><td>2</td><td>A</td></tr>
<tr><td>3</td><td><code>4a848f</code></td><td><code>3d2f27</code></td><td>false</td><td>2</td><td>A</td></tr>
<tr><td>4</td><td><code>09210f</code></td><td></td><td>false</td><td>3</td><td>A</td></tr>
<tr><td>4</td><td><code>2190d3</code></td><td><code>1f64f9</code></td><td>false</td><td>3</td><td>A</td></tr>
<tr class="workingtable-highlight"><td>4</td><td><code>3d2f27</code></td><td><code>09210f</code></td><td>false</td><td>3</td><td>A</td></tr>
<tr class="workingtable-highlight"><td>4</td><td><code>3d2f27</code></td><td><code>2190d3</code></td><td>false</td><td>3</td><td>A</td></tr>
</table>

> Notice that there are two ways to get from commit `7033ee` to commit `3d2f27`, the therefore the entries for `3d2f27` are duplicated in the CTE results (and therefore the working table). Also notice that the number of _new_ rows per iteration is growing as the iteration count rises in such graphs. **For some configuration of input, this query is [quadratic](https://accidentallyquadratic.tumblr.com/) instead of linear.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice that there are two ways to get from commit `7033ee` to commit `3d2f27`, therefore the entries for `3d2f27` are duplicated in the CTE results (and therefore the working table). Also notice that the number of _new_ rows per iteration is growing as the iteration count rises in such graphs. **For some configuration of input, this query is [quadratic](https://accidentallyquadratic.tumblr.com/) instead of linear.**
```

> What we _wanted_ to happen was for the "duplicate rows" not to be inserted into the working table at all. Unfortunately, each record in this example distinct due to the differing path lengths - a detail we glossed over when designing this query in the first place. Another classic case of the computer doing what you _told_ it to do instead of what you _wanted_ it to do. 🙄

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What we _wanted_ to happen was for the "duplicate rows" not to be inserted into the working table at all. Unfortunately, each record in this example is distinct due to the differing path lengths - a detail we glossed over when designing this query in the first place. Another classic case of the computer doing what you _told_ it to do instead of what you _wanted_ it to do. 🙄
```

---

> Our [first attempt](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5980) to optimize this query directly tackled the problem of duplicate rows in the worktable, as shown in the above example. This change simply removes the direction column from the lineage table expression. The "duplicates" that we now throw out are records for commits that have already been seen via a shorter path. This required that we limiting condition out of the table expression and into the select, which changes the behavior very slightly (it now limits by working set size, not by distance, which was an acceptable trade-off for the performance increase).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our [first attempt](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5980) to optimize this query directly tackled the problem of duplicate rows in the worktable, as shown in the above example. This change simply removes the direction column from the lineage table expression. The "duplicates" that we now throw out are records for commits that have already been seen via a shorter path. This required that we take the limiting condition out of the table expression and into the select, which changes the behavior very slightly (it now limits by working set size, not by distance, which was an acceptable trade-off for the performance increase).
```

Additional [efforts](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5984) to optimize this query were highly successful. The following chart compares the query latency of the original query (_quadratic_, blue) and the optimized query (_fast linear_, green), and we've *very clearly* removed the term that was creating the quadratic behavior.

<div class="no-shadow">
  <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1387653/66709486-a9813900-ed22-11e9-9519-d9a9c098b37d.png" alt="query latency comparison">
</div>

The culprit is the index scan within the nested loop. Ignore the sequential scan block here, which is a red herring. The sequential scan happens in favor of an index because of the small size of the `lsif_data_markers` dataset. When the table becomes larger, it is replaced with an efficient index scan.

> **But index scans are supposed to be fast!** Well, they _are_ faster than a sequential scan, but may not be as fast as an index scan that uses a different index, or uses an index in a slightly different way. This particular scan fetches rows from the commits table using only `c.repository = l.repository` as the index condition. This pulls back literally the entire commit graph for the repository and where each row is then filtered based on the remaining conditions. There are two multicolumn indexes that _could_ conceivably be used here: one on (`repository`, `commit`) and one on (`repository`, `parent_commit`). However, the following filter conditions would require the use of _both_ indexes, which Postgres seems unable to do, or unwilling to do due to an inaccurate query cost estimate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**But index scans are supposed to be fast!** Well, they _are_ faster than a sequential scan, but may not be as fast as an index scan that uses a different index, or uses an index in a slightly different way. This particular scan fetches rows from the commits table using only `c.repository = l.repository` as the index condition. This pulls back literally the entire commit graph for the repository and each row is then filtered based on the remaining conditions. There are two multicolumn indexes that _could_ conceivably be used here: one on (`repository`, `commit`) and one on (`repository`, `parent_commit`). However, the following filter conditions would require the use of _both_ indexes, which Postgres seems unable to do, or unwilling to do due to an inaccurate query cost estimate.
```

```

The query plan for this new query, shown below, seems more complex at first glance. However, this query is **drastically** more efficient. The same input that required 330ms to evaluate now takes under 1ms to evaluate.

![super fast query plan](https://sourcegraphstatic.com/blog/commit-graph-optimizations/super-fast.png)

Even though we're now executing a greater number of steps, each step can be evaluated efficiently. The old inefficient index scan has been broken into two different index scans: one that traverses the ancestor direction, and another that traverses the descendant direction. The simple conditionals in each query can be evaluated _without an index filter_ by each of the multicolumn indexes above. Instead of pulling back the entire commit graph on each iteration of the table expression, we pull exactly the set of rows that need to be added to the working table.

This change makes the query efficient enough that we no longer have to worry about caching results, as running it on every request only contributes a negligible amount of time. Thus solving the problem [once and for all](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IjmtVKOAHPM)!

> ## Scalability improvements

Author: Let me chop it into two files.

Well, it solves the problem once and for all _at a particular scale_. There is an entire class of enterprise customers we would like to target to benefit from this feature as well, except the speed at which the code moves is a huge obstacle to overcome using this technique of calculating visible uploads on demand.

> In order to prevent queries which must travel a large distance over the commit graph before finding a visible upload from timing out or affecting the stability of the database, we still keep a hard limit on the number of commits we will visit during the graph traversal. The benefit of this limit is we bring stability to the Sourcegraph instance by limiting the maximum load a single query can put on the database. The downside of this limit is that there are many shapes of commit graphs and data markers that will fail to find a visible upload, even if the distance is not too large.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to prevent queries which must travel a large distance over the commit graph before finding a visible upload from timing out or affecting the stability of the database, we still keep a hard limit on the number of commits we will visit during the graph traversal. The benefit of this limit is stability to the Sourcegraph instance by limiting the maximum load a single query can put on the database. The downside of this limit is that there are many shapes of commit graphs and data markers that will fail to find a visible upload, even if the distance is not too large.
```

Since we stopped tracking distance to increase the number of duplicate rows, we no longer have a limit on _distance_, but on the number of total commits. This means that one query will travel a smaller distance on a commit graph with a large number of merge commits and a larger distance on a commit graph that is mostly linear.

Another issue is high commit velocity. Suppose that we have a hard limit of viewing 50 commits. We will then be able to look (approximately) 25 commits in a single direction. If the process for uploading LSIF data only happens every 50 commits, on average, then there will be pockets of commits that cannot see far enough to spot a relative commit with an upload. This turns out to be common in the case of large development teams working on single repository.

> In this circumstance, bounded traversals are a fundamental design flaw. In order to get rid of this constraint, we turn to a technique that we've had great success with in the past: index the result of the queries out of band. This technique forms the basis of our search: we create a series of n-gram indexes over source text so we can quickly look inside text documents. This technique also forms the basis of our code intelligence: we create [indexes](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsif/0.5.0/specification) that contain the answers to all the relevant language server queries that could be made about code at a particular revision.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this circumstance, bounded traversals are a fundamental design flaw. In order to get rid of this constraint, we turn to a technique that was very successful in the past: index the result of the queries out of band. This technique forms the basis of our search: we create a series of n-gram indexes over source text so we can quickly look inside text documents. This technique also forms the basis of our code intelligence: we create [indexes](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsif/0.5.0/specification) that contain the answers to all the relevant language server queries that could be made about code at a particular revision.
```

> In the same spirit, we eschew graph traversal at query time and calculate the set of visible uploads for each commit ahead of time (whenever the commit graph or set of uploads for a repository changes). This reduces the complexity of the query in the request path into a simple single-record lookup.

Author: Here, _simple_ was meant to be a modifier on "single-record lookup". I don't think it reads as intended with the comma.

The `lsif_dirty_repositories` table tracks which repositories need their commit graphs updated. When we receive an upload for a repository, or get a request for a commit that we don't currently track, we bump the `dirty_token` value attached to that repository. When we are about to refresh the graph, we note the dirty token, calculate the set of visible uploads for each commit, write it to the database, and set the `update_token` to the value of the dirty token we noted earlier. This ensures that we avoid a particular class of race conditions that occur when we receive an upload at the same time we're re-calculating the commit graph from a previous upload.

| repository                    | dirty_token | update_token |
| ----------------------------- | ----------- | ------------ |
| github.com/sourcegraph/sample | 42          | 42           |

#### Example

For this example, we'll use the same graph as we did above, where commits `80c800`, `c85b4b`, and `3daedb` define uploads #1, #2, and #3, respectively.

<div class="no-shadow">
  <img src="https://sourcegraphstatic.com/blog/commit-graph-optimizations/graph3.png" alt="sample commit graph">
</div>

> The first step to the algorithm is to [topologically order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_sorting) each commit so that a commit is processed only after all of its parents are processed. Then we perform a simple [greedy process](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greedy_algorithm) to determine which uploads are visible at each stage of the commit. If a commit defines an upload, it is visible to that commit. Otherwise, the set of visible uploads for the commit is the same as the uploads visible from each parent (just at a higher distance).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first step to the algorithm is to [topologically sort](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_sorting) each commit so that a commit is processed only after all of its parents are processed. Then we perform a simple [greedy process](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greedy_algorithm) to determine which uploads are visible at each stage of the commit. If a commit defines an upload, it is visible to that commit. Otherwise, the set of visible uploads for the commit is the same as the uploads visible from each parent (just at a higher distance).
```

| <code>69a5ed</code> | <code>{(id=3, dist=2)}</code> | <code>{(id=1, dist=1)}</code> | <code>{(id=1, dist=1)}</code> | #1             |
| <code>063211</code> | <code>{}</code>               | <code>{(id=1, dist=2)}</code> | <code>{(id=1, dist=2)}</code> | #1             |
| <code>9d9c37</code> | <code>{}</code>               | <code>{(id=1, dist=3)}</code> | <code>{(id=1, dist=3)}</code> | #1             |
| <code>f9727d</code> | <code>{(id=3, dist=1)}</code> | <code>{(id=1, dist=2)}</code> | <code>{(id=3, dist=1)}</code> | #3             |
| <code>3daedb</code> | <code>{(id=3, dist=0)}</code> | <code>{(id=3, dist=0)}</code> | <code>{(id=3, dist=0)}</code> | #3             |
| <code>e8331f</code> | <code>{}</code>               | <code>{(id=3, dist=1)}</code> | <code>{(id=3, dist=1)}</code> | #3             |

The topological ordering of the commit graph and each traversal takes time linear to the size of the commit graph, making this entire procedure a linear time operation.

## The neglected scaling dimension

Well, it's not _quite_ linear time if you take into account some of the stuff we claimed we could hand-wave away earlier: index files for different root directories.

> Many large repositories are built up of smaller, self-contained projects. Or, at least independently analyzable units of code. This enables a fairly corse caching scheme: each time the repository is indexed on git push or periodically, only the units fo code that have had explicitly changed since the last indexed commit needs to be re-indexed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many large repositories are built up of smaller, self-contained projects. Or, at least independently analyzable units of code. This enables a fairly coarse caching scheme: each time the repository is indexed on git push or periodically, only the units fo code that have had explicitly changed since the last indexed commit needs to be re-indexed.
```

    </td>
    <td>
        <code>(id=1, root=foo/, dist=2)</code><br />
        <code>(id=4, root=bnk/, dist=0)</code><br />
        <code>(id=5, root=baz/, dist=1)</code>
    </td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td><code>063211</code></td>
    <td>
        <code>(id=2, root=bar/, dist=3)</code><br />
        <code>(id=3, root=foo/, dist=2)</code><br />
        <code>(id=4, root=bnk/, dist=2)</code><br />
        <code>(id=5, root=baz/, dist=1)</code>
    </td>
    <td></td>
    <td>
        <code>(id=2, root=bar/, dist=3)</code><br />
        <code>(id=3, root=foo/, dist=2)</code><br />
        <code>(id=4, root=bnk/, dist=2)</code><br />
        <code>(id=5, root=baz/, dist=1)</code>
    </td>
</tr>
</table>

The size of the table here (relative to the simple table produced by a single-root repository) is the thing to note. Let's say a repository has _n_ commits and _m_ distinctly indexable directories. Each commit then can see up to _m_ uploads, which drastically balloons the cost of merging two sets of visible uploads. This is further impacts performance in the presence of many merge commits.

**We drastically underestimated the value of _m_ for some enterprise customers.**

> One of our large enterprise customers, one of our earliest adopters of LSIF-base code intelligence at scale, had completed an upgraded from Sourcegraph 3.17 to 3.20. After the upgrade, they realized they were no longer getting refreshed precise code intelligence and sent us this poorly drawn Sydney Opera House of a graph, indicating that something was deeply wrong.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of our large enterprise customers, who is also one of our earliest adopters of LSIF-base code intelligence at scale, had completed an upgraded from Sourcegraph 3.17 to 3.20. After the upgrade, they realized they were no longer getting refreshed precise code intelligence and sent us this poorly drawn Sydney Opera House of a graph, indicating that something was deeply wrong.
```

## Hitting a moving target

While we were busy preparing a patch release to restore code intelligence to our customer, they had upgraded to the next version to fix an unrelated error they were experiencing in Sourcegraph's search code.

This made things **far** worse. In Sourcegraph 3.22, we moved the code that calculated the commit graph from the precise-code-intel-worker into the frontend in an effort to consolidate background and period processes into the same package. Our first stab at memory reduction wasn't quite _enough_, and now the frontend pods were taking turns using all available memory and crashing.

This made their entire instance unstable, and this series of events escalated us from a priority zero event to a [priority now](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/oldnewthing/20081121-00/?p=20123) event.

> We attacked the problem again, starting out again by tackling some low-hanging fruit by ignoring large gobs of data we ended up not needing. When we pull back the commit graph for a repository, it's unlikely that we need the _entire_ commit graph. There's little sense in filling out the visibility of the long tale of historic commits, especially as its distance to the oldest LSIF upload grows over time. Now, we [entirely ignore](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/16140) the portion of the commit graph that existed _before_ the oldest known LSIF upload fro that repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We attacked the problem again, starting out again by tackling some low-hanging fruit by ignoring large amounts of unneeded data. When we pull back the commit graph for a repository, it's unlikely that we need the _entire_ commit graph. There's little sense in filling out the visibility of the long tale of historic commits, especially as its distance to the oldest LSIF upload grows over time. Now, we [entirely ignore](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/16140) the portion of the commit graph that existed _before_ the oldest known LSIF upload fro that repository.
```

In the same spirit, we can remove the explicit step of topologically sorting the commit graph in the application by instead [sorting it via the git command](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/16270). This is basically the same win as replacing a `sort` call in your webapp with an `ORDER BY` clause in your SQL query. This further reduces the required memory as we're no longer taking large amounts of stack space to traverse long chains of commits in the graph.

> Our [last change](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/16368), however, was the real heavy hitter. So far, we've been storing our commit graph in a map from commits to the set of uploads visible from that commit. When the number number of distinct roots is large, these lists are also quite large. Most notably, this makes the merge operation between two lists quite expensive in terms of both CPU (the original merge procedure compares each pair of elements from the list in a trivial but quadratic nested loop) and memory (merging two lists creates a third, all of which are live at the same time).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our [last change](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/16368), however, was the real heavy hitter. So far, we've been storing our commit graph in a map from commits to the set of uploads visible from that commit. When the number of distinct roots is large, these lists are also quite large. Most notably, this makes the merge operation between two lists quite expensive in terms of both CPU (the original merge procedure compares each pair of elements from the list in a trivial but quadratic nested loop) and memory (merging two lists creates a third, all of which are live at the same time).
```

> At a slight expense of memory, we can greatly optimize CPU time by instead by slightly altering this mapping. Note that looking in a single direction, each commit can see at most one upload for a particular indexer and root. Then, instead of storing a flat list of visible uploads per commit, we can store a map from the indexer/root values to the visible upload with those properties. Merge operations now become linear in the size of the input lists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At a slight expense of memory, we can greatly optimize CPU time by instead slightly altering this mapping. Note that looking in a single direction, each commit can see at most one upload for a particular indexer and root. Then, instead of storing a flat list of visible uploads per commit, we can store a map from the indexer/root values to the visible upload with those properties. Merge operations now become linear in the size of the input lists.
```

1. The amount of data we're writing into Postgres _is_ a problem.

Our [final and successful effort](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/16636) to fix these time and space issues attacked the problem in two parts.

First, we've changed the commit graph traversal behavior to look only at ancestors. Since we started to ignore the bulk of the commit graph that existed before the first commit with LSIF data, looking into the _future_ for LSIF data now has limited applicability. Generally, users will be on the tip of a branch (either the default branch, or a feature branch if reviewing a pull request). We can still answer code intelligence queries for these commits, as they necessarily occur after _some_ LSIF data has been uploaded. Additionally, an unrelated [bug fix](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/16733) caused descendant-direction traversals to increase memory usage. So at this point, it just seemed sensible to stop worrying about this reverse case, which was never truly necessary from a usability standpoint. Looking in one direction reduces the amount of data we need to store by about 50%.

> Second, we re-applied our tricks described in the previous section. We had good luck at throwing out huge amounts of data which we could efficiently recalculate when necessary, and save the resources that would otherwise be required to store them. This concept is known as [rematerialization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rematerialization) in the compiler ecosystem, where values may be computed multiple times instead of storing and loading the already-computed value from memory in the case where a load/store pair is more expensive than the computation itself, or if it would otherwise increase register pressure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, we re-applied our tricks described in the previous section. We had good luck with throwing out huge amounts of data which we could efficiently recalculate when necessary, and save the resources that would otherwise be required to store them. This concept is known as [rematerialization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rematerialization) in the compiler ecosystem, where values may be computed multiple times instead of storing and loading the already-computed value from memory in the case where a load/store pair is more expensive than the computation itself, or if it would otherwise increase register pressure.
```

> Instead of writing the set of visible uploads per commit, what if we only store the visible uploads for commits that can't trivially recomputed? We've already determined the set of commits that can be easily rematerialized - we can just move the rematerialization from database insertion time to query time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of writing the set of visible uploads per commit, what if we only store the visible uploads for commits that can't trivially recomputed? We've already determined the set of commits that can be easily rematerialized—we can just move the rematerialization from database insertion time to query time.
```

> However, it's not as easy as just throwing out the data we don't need - we still need to encode some additional bookkeeping metadata to enable us to recalculate these values cheaply (without pulling back and traversing the entire commit graph on each query).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it's not as easy as just throwing out the data we don't need—we still need to encode some additional bookkeeping metadata to enable us to recalculate these values cheaply (without pulling back and traversing the entire commit graph on each query).
```

> We introduced a new table, `lsif_nearest_uploads_links`, which stores a link from each commit that can be trivially recomputed to its nearest ancestor with LSIF data. Queries are still now a simply constant-time lookup:

Reviewer: "Queries are still now a simply constant-time lookup" – this wording sounds a bit awkward to me?

#### Example

We'll use the following commit graph again for our example. Here, commit `68acd3` defines upload #1, and `67e0bf` defines upload #2 (both with distinct indexing root directories).

<div class="no-shadow">
  <img src="https://sourcegraphstatic.com/blog/commit-graph-optimizations/graph5.png" alt="sample commit graph">
</div>

The `lsif_nearest_uploads` table associates a commit with its visible uploads, just as before. But now, the number of records in the table is much, much smaller. The commits present in this table satisfy one of the properties described above that make the commit non-trivial to recompute.

| repository                    | commit              | upload_ids          |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------- | ------------------- |
| github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>4a8a33</code> | <code>[]</code>     |
| github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>68acd3</code> | <code>[1]</code>    |
| github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>e43f5b</code> | <code>[1]</code>    |
| github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>67e0bf</code> | <code>[2]</code>    |
| github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>599611</code> | <code>[1, 2]</code> |

> Luckily, some benefits compound one another here, and after we started ignoring traversing the graph in both directions, we can simplify these properties to only account for ancestor-direction traversals. Notably, a commit whose parent has multiple children (`7e0471`, for example) were necessary to store for the descendant-direction traversal, but no longer need to be stored. This further increases the number of trivially recomputable commits, saving even more space.

Reviewer 2: this paragraph is not clear. what doesn't need to be stored anymore. the multiple children ?

The `lsif_nearest_uploads_links` table stores a _forwarding pointer_ to the ancestor that has the same set of visible uploads.

| repository                    | commit              | ancestor_commit     |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------- | ------------------- |
| github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>91a565</code> | <code>68acd3</code> |
| github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>7e0471</code> | <code>4a8a33</code> |
| github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>52811d</code> | <code>7e0471</code> |
| github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>7b1a18</code> | <code>599611</code> |
| github.com/sourcegraph/sample | <code>dd8578</code> | <code>599611</code> |

> Note that for our instances with a large number of distinct indexing roots, this saves a **massive** amount of storage space. The majority of commits (> 80%) can link to an ancestor, which requires only referencing a fixed-size commit hash. The remaining minority of commits must explicitly list their visible uploads, of which there may be many thousands.

Reviewer: I feel like this ends a bit abruptly. I'm not suggesting a "Conclusion" paragraph to end, but it might be helpful to close with a summary of what you did/learned?

Author: I left a few todos to myself to massage some of the content in part 2.
